---
layout: post
title:  "Obligation to Excellence"
date:   2021-01-02 04:56:00 -0500
categories: morality philosophy humanity mankind obligation excellence
---

One of my favorite passages in When Breath Becomes Air by Paul Kalanithi is his reasoning on why those in who practice neurosurgery have a moral obligation to excellence. Doctors are bound by the Hippocratic oath to act in the best interest of their patients. The oath applies to all of a doctors patients, current and future and it is owed to the future patients to have their doctors strive for excellence since the day may come where it will make the difference between life and death. I love this passage for many reasons. Firstly, Kalanithi is an exceptionally gifted writer and When Breath Becomes Air was an absolute joy to read. Kalanithi speaks with a conviction he earned by honoring the oath so dearly while he practiced medicine. I also like that it makes doing the right thing easy, of course neurosurgeons should try their best, duh. They prepared their whole life for this, and it’s that rigorous training that makes them morally superior to non-doctors, right? But does that mean we non-doctors off the hook? I definitely don’t have patients whom I owe my excellence to. Nor have I taken a moral oath to seek excellence in my profession. (Although, my knowledge of the four Catholic sacrament’s I’ve received is a little fuzzy, so there may be some kind of forgotten obligation in there.) Do I hold anyone’s life, or even livelihood in my hands? Does anyone look to me for leadership or example and should I be considerate of reactions to my actions? Do I owe it to myself? I feel like there are people that I should owe something to: family, friends, mentors? Maybe I can give them my excellence, I’m sure they’d appreciate it. In my opinion, there’s a right answer to this question: all of them and everyone else and anyone who’s ever been and anyone who ever will be. My reasoning lies in mankind’s history.

Intelligence is the flame given to mankind by Prometheus. And our history is like a forest ablaze with conflict caused by individuals that could not handle the gift or were not weary of its affects. Our biology tells us to seek sex, power, security, money but we live in societies that are very specific about how we can get those things. The guiding principle that leads us on our search for sex, power, security, and money is morality. Morality is a growing storm cloud over the burning forest of mankind, dowsing, for now, the flames, but a deluge is coming.

Morality evolved in humans as an exaptation to complement their evolutionarily social tendencies. That is, one day mankind used its intelligence to reason that chaos is not the ideal state for the species to exist in and that rules should be followed for the betterment of man and its communities. As these communities (lets call them states) grew, so did the complexity of their judicial and justice systems. But no matter how big the states got, there were lots of them, and while states could agree on rules that fit their needs, convincing other states that those rules should be followed is another story. This environment bred conflict and the world was ravaged by millennia of war, the flame of intelligence being used to create increasingly efficient methods of achieving ones wants, often to terrible ends. But the world of wars is slowly becoming a memory, the sheer scale and horror of the crimes committed is incomprehensible by modern standards. Children today can’t possibly understand the scale of the past conflicts, suffering endured, or the motives of the perpetrators. Interestingly, this does not mean that the blackest stains on humanity are fading to gray, nor that humanity will forget them. The stains run so deep and dark that they are absurd to the modern eye. The rational mind insists, "nothing could have ever been so deep, so dark, or so terrible". It insists further, "of course it could never come to that again, the belligerents and perpatrators in those conflicts and crimes were short-sighted to the point of blindness". In hindsight it looks like they lost their minds and it could only ever end in disaster for them. Today, we know more, we share more, we feel more.

Exaptations, like adaptations, have a tendency to evolve over time and the rate at which humans can evolve their morality is exceptional. If ensuring the survival of one’s species is the goal, then our morality is our ability to shapeshift. We have been honing this gift for millennia and it’s results are overt when one looks at the scale of conflicts in the last 100 years. Lack of war facilitates the development of moral codes and a more refined sense or morality makes it easier to avoid war. And thus, the rain cloud grows and the fires of conflict are extinguished. Intelligence gives us the ability to know right from wrong, and morality compels us to act on that knowledge.

To be honest, “owing your best to the future of your species” seems like the punchline in a bad sci-fi movie. Calling morality an exaptation makes it seem like its equivalent to having a tail, or wings, or gills. The reality is that you owe the past infinitely more than you owe the future. If you are reading this post, I’m assuming you have enjoyed some kind of privileged life, much more privileged than most of humanity, even. You probably don’t live under existential threat and to a reasonable degree your security is assured. You then, owe it to the billions of people who did not enjoy that luxury. There are people that knew nothing but suffering during their lives. People lived and continue to live under constant threat of violence or under institutions whose depravity and existence stain our collective soul. In that abyss, you find who is owed your best. The lessons that they taught are why you can enjoy what they couldn’t. The greatest disservice you can do for yourself is let those hard fought lessons be forgotten. You don’t work hard for nameless, faceless, future spawn. You owe your best to the billions who suffered and are suffering, each of whom has a face, each of whom has a name.

If you are a doctor, this activity may be too easy for you. But I’m willing to bet that most people haven’t considered or don’t know who is being impacted by their actions, possibly through willful ignorance, but likely strategic obfuscation. Negative effects of your actions are hidden from your view because the public has lost its stomach for depravity and its appetite shrinks everyday. Morals have to be carefully danced around because the mankind is known to react strongly when its morals are challenged. In addition to seeing the negative effects of your actions, the negative effects of your inaction should also be considered, how many more people do you think suffer if you are not trying your best, make a guess if you want. Occasionally, one must be reminded that they do not exist as a human in isolation who’s actions have no impact on the people around them, but that they hold in them the potential to cause a huge amount of suffering and joy. It’s like a kind of moral potential energy where acting morally, and therefore working towards excellence pushes your rock higher up the mountain making your impact on the world around you larger and larger.

Therefore, please try your best, for the sake of the past, present, and future.